**Abstract**

The widespread herbicide glyphosate has been detected in aquatic coastal zones of the southern Baltic Sea with yet unknown consequences for this brackish ecosystem. We investigated the impact of glyphosate on the succession of bacterial community assemblages and functions in brackish and phosphorus-limited microcosms. These were incubated for 69 days prior adding of glyphosate to obtain stable community dynamics; eventually, the microcosms were incubated for further 72 days. The system was sampled up to twice a week for the whole incubation period and analyzed concerning glyphosate degradation and bacterial succession. Succession of bacterial assemblages and their functions was determined by cell count analyses, next generation 16S rRNA (gene) amplicon as well as shotgun metagenomic sequencing, respectively. As result, glyphosate was degraded without detectable amounts of aminomethylphosphonic acid. Glyphosate addition revealed shifts in the bacterial community compositions, as well as increases in cell counts, the abundance of specific clusters on genus level, microbial diversity, and cluster richness. Metagenomic analyses revealed a shift in the stoichiometric composition of the phn operon, resulting in increased numbers of the phnM gene. The phn operon shift was detected till the end of the experiment whereas all the other described responses disappeared at latest after 29 days when glyphosate concentrations were below 1 mg∙L-1. The phn operon probably encoded for cleaving the C-P bond in glyphosate, yielding sarcosine. Its shift towards clusters harboring more phnM copies was probably an effect of glyphosate utilization as a P resource by a P-limited bacterial community. Thus, glyphosate impacted bacterial assemblages in a brackish system on different levels, but especially their functional gene compositions for a prolonged period of time. Further analyses should deepen the understanding if whether accordant functional fingerprints could be used as an environmental glyphosate indicator.
